Chapter 04: TCP/IP Protocol suite
Delivery and Forwarding of IP Packets

http://www.tcpipguide.com



Objectives
• To discuss the delivery of packets in the network layer and 

distinguish between direct and indirect delivery. 
• To discuss the forwarding of packets in the network layer and 

distinguish between destination-address–based forwarding and 
label-based forwarding.

• To discuss different forwarding techniques, including next-hop, 
network-specific, host-specific, and default. 

• To discuss the contents of routing tables in classful and classless 
addressing and some algorithms used to search the tables.



Direct and Indirect 



Direct Delivery

• Occurs when the source and destination of the packet are located on 
the same physical network or if the delivery is between the last 
router and the destination host.

• The sender uses the destination IP address to find the destination 
physical address (with ARP) to create link layer frame for actual 
delivery.



Indirect Delivery

• Indirect delivery occurs when the source and destination of the 
packet are not on the same physical network. The packet goes from 
router to router until it reaches the one connected to the same 
physical network as its final destination.

• In an indirect delivery, the sender uses the destination IP address 
and a routing table to find the IP address of the next router to which 
the packet should be delivered. The sender then uses ARP to find the 
physical address of the next router delivered. The last delivery is 
always a direct delivery.



Indirect Delivery



Forwarding means to place the packet in its route to its destination. Since 
the Internet today is made of a combination of links (networks), 
forwarding means to deliver the packet to the next hop (which can be the 
final destination or the intermediate connecting device)
Because IP is a connectionless protocol, forwarding is based on the 
destination address of the IP datagram; when the IP is used as a 
connection-oriented protocol, forwarding is based on the label attached to 
an IP datagram.



Forwarding Based on Destination Address 

• This is a traditional approach, forwarding requires a host or a router to have 
a routing table. When a host has a packet to send or when a router has 
received a packet to be forwarded, it looks at this table to find the route to 
the final destination. 

• However, this solution is inefficient in an internetwork such as the Internet 
because the number of entries needed in the routing table would make table 
lookups inefficient.



Forwarding Techniques
Next-Hop: 
The routing table holds only the address of the next hop instead of information 
about the complete route. The entries of a routing table must be consistent with 
each other.



Forwarding Techniques
Network-specific: 
instead of having an entry for every destination host connected to the same 
physical network, we have only one entry that defines the address of the 
destination network itself. In other words, all hosts connected to the same 
network are treated as one single entity.



Forwarding Techniques
Host-specific: 
the destination host address is given in the routing table. Here efficiency is 
sacrificed for other advantages: Although it is not efficient to put the host 
address in the routing table, there are occasions in which the administrator 
wants to have more control over routing



Forwarding Techniques
Default:  
Host A is connected to a network with two routers. Router R1 routes the packets 
to hosts connected to network N2. However, for the rest of the Internet, router 
R2 is used. So instead of listing all networks in the entire Internet, host A can 
just have one entry called the default (normally defined as network address 
0.0.0.0)



Forwarding with Classful Addressing
Forward without subnetting:  
Subnetting happens inside the organization, most of the routers in the global 
Internet are not involved in subnetting.
• The forwarding module has 3 routing tables, one for each class A,B or C.
• Each routing table has a minimum of 3 columns:

1. The network address of the destination network indicates where the destination 
host is located (network-specific forwarding)

2. The next-hop address indicates to which router the packet must be delivered for an 
indirect delivery. This column is empty for a direct delivery. 

3. The interface number defines the outgoing port from which the packet is sent out. 
A router is normally connected to several networks. Each connection has a 
different numbered port or interface. (m0, m1, m2, …)



Forwarding module in 
Classful Address without Subnetting



Forwarding with Classful Addressing

In its simplest form, the forwarding module follows these steps: 
1. The destination address of the packet is extracted. 
2. A copy of the destination address is used to find the class of the address. This is done 

by shifting the copy of the address 28 bits to the right. The result is a 4-bit number 
between 0 and 15.  If the result is: 0 to 7, the class is A; 8 to 11, the class is B; 12 or 13, 
the class is C; 14, the class is D; 15, the class is E. 

3. Masking off the rightmost 8, 16, or 24 bits based on the class of the result from  Step 2 
to extract the network address. 

4. The class determines which table is used for searching the network address. If a match 
is found, the next-hop address and the interface number of the output port are 
extracted from the table. If no mat.ch is found, the default is used



Example

Find the routing tables for router R1 in the figure:
Default: 111.30.31.18,  m0



Example



Example
How the packet is forwarded in these 2 cases:
1. Router R1 receives a packet with destination address 192.16.7.14.
2. Router R1 receives a packet with destination address 167.24.160.5

Default: 111.30.31.18,  m0



Forwarding with Classful Addressing

• Forward with subnetting:  Subnetting happens inside the organization, 
most of the routers in the global Internet are not involved in subnetting.

• If the organization is using variable-length subnetting, we need several 
tables; otherwise, we need only one table.



Example



Forwarding with Classless Addressing
• The routing table in classful addressing has 3 columns, 

for classless, we have one additional Mask (/n) column.



Example
• Create the routing table for router R1 in figure?



Show the forwarding process if a packet arrives at R1 with the 
destination address 180.70.65.140



Routing metrics, Static vs Dynamic Routing, Routing protocol, 
Autonomous System, Convergences, Routing algorithms



Routing metric/cost
• Path Length
• Reliability
• Routing Delay
• Bandwidth
• Load



Static vs Dynamic Routing Table 
A routing table can be either static or dynamic. 
▫ A static table is one with manual entries. 
▫ A dynamic table is one that is updated automatically when 

there is a change somewhere on the internet. 
An internet needs dynamic routing tables. The tables need 
to be updated as soon as there is a change on the internet. 
For instance, they need to be updated when a link is down, 
and they need to be updated whenever a better route has 
been found. 



Routing Protocols

• Routing protocols have been created in response to the 
demand for dynamic routing tables. 

• A routing protocol is a combination of rules and 
procedures that lets routers on the internet inform each 
other of changes. It allows routers to share whatever they 
know about the internet or their neighborhood.

• Routing protocols can be either an interior protocol 
(intradomain) or an exterior protocol (interdomain). 



Autonomous System (AS)
• An autonomous system (AS) is a 

group of networks and routers under the 
authority of a single administration. 

• Routing inside an autonomous system is 
referred to as intra-domain routing. 
Routing between autonomous systems is 
referred to as inter-domain routing 



Interior and Exterior Gateway Protocols
• Routing protocols used within an autonomous 

system are called interior gateway protocols or 
intradomain protocols

• Routing protocols that route between 
autonomous systems are called exterior gateway 
protocols or interdomain protocols.



Interior & Exterior Routing Protocols

Internal Internal 
Routers Routers

External 
Routers



Convergence
• How much time a router takes to react to 

network topology changes.
• The convergence time varies depending on the 

routing algorithm. Fast convergence minimizes 
the chance of lost packets caused by inaccurate 
routing information.



Routing Algorithms
• Routing algorithms determine how a router 

gathers and reports reachability information, 
how it deals with topology changes, and how it 
determines the optimal route to a destination.

• Can be classified as:
▫ Static or Dynamic
▫ Interior or Exterior 



Static Routes & Dynamic Routing Protocols

• Static routes are route tables that are manually 
configured, these routes do not change unless 
being reconfigured.

• Most routing protocols today use dynamic 
routing algorithms, which adjust to changing 
network circumstances by analyzing incoming 
routing update messages



Distance Vector Protocols
• Distance vector algorithms define routes by distance (# 

of hops to the destination) and direction (for the next-
hop router).

• Distance vector protocols use distance vector algorithms 
(Bellman-Ford algorithms): each router send all or some 
portion of its routing table to its neighbors. These routes 
are then broadcast to the directly connected neighbor 
routers. Each router uses these updates to verify and 
update the routing tables.



Distance Vector Routing Protocols
There are four distance vector IPv4 IGPs:
• RIPv1: First generation legacy protocol
• RIPv2: Simple distance vector routing protocol
• IGRP: First generation Cisco proprietary protocol 

(obsolete and replaced by EIGRP)
• EIGRP: Advanced version of distance vector routing



Link-State Protocols
• The link-state protocols, also known as shortest 

path first (SPF), share information with 
neighboring routers. 

• Each router builds a link-state advertisement 
(LSA), which contains information about each 
link and directly connected neighbor router.



Link-State Protocols
The link-state database stored in each router 
consists of parameters:
▫ Router id
▫ Neighor id
▫ Link cost
▫ Sequence # of the LSA
▫ Age of LSA entry



Link-State Routing Protocols
Link-state protocols work best in situations where:
• The network design is hierarchical, usually occurring in large 

networks.
• Fast convergence of the network is crucial
• The administrators have good knowledge of the implemented link-

state routing protocol
There are two link-state IPv4 IGPs:
• OSPF: Popular standards-based routing protocol
• IS-IS: Popular in provider networks



Classifying routing protocols
By
• Purpose: IGPs, EGPs
• Operation: Distance vector, 

Link-State, Path-vector
• Behavior: Classful, classless
For example:
• RIPv1 (legacy): IGP, 

distance vector, classful 
protocol

• OSPF: IGP, link-state, 
classless protocol



Routing Protocols Characteristics
• Speed of convergence: how quickly the routers in the 

network topology share routing information and reach a 
state of consistent knowledge. The faster the 
convergence, the more preferable the protocol. 

• Scalability: how large a network can become, based on 
the routing protocol that is deployed. The larger the 
network is, the more scalable the routing protocol needs 
to be.

• Classful or classless



Routing Protocols Characteristics
• Resource usage: the requirements of a routing 

protocol such as memory space (RAM), CPU utilization, 
and link bandwidth utilization. Higher resource 
requirements necessitate more powerful hardware to 
support the routing protocol operation, in addition to the 
packet forwarding processes.

• Implementation and maintenance: the level of 
knowledge that is required for a network administrator 
to implement and maintain the network based on the 
routing protocol deployed.






Configuration
router# configure terminal
router(config)# ip route <dest net> <mask> <gw>
router# show ip route
Example:
• ip route 192.168.15.0 255.255.255.0 203.162.39.1



Example