Network security
Chapter 07

Contents
• Security Goals
• Cipher System
• Security Attacks
• Common System Attack
• Physical Protection
• Controlling Access
• Securing data
• Security protocols

Security Goals
Confidentiality

Security
Availability

Integrity

Security Attacks

Security Attacks
• Attack: Any action that compromises the security of information.
• Four types of attack:

1.

Interruption:
Attack on Availability

S

D

Access
Block

2.

Interception: Attack on Confidentiality

3.

Modification: Attack on Integrity

4.

Fabrication: Attack on Authenticity

S

S

I

D
I

D
Intercept

D

S
I

Passive & Active Attacks
Passive

Active

• Obtain information that is being

• Modify or create a false stream.

transmitted (eavesdropping)

• Two types:

 Release of message contents
 Traffic analysis
• Very difficult to detect

• Four categories:

 Masquerade
 Replay
 Modification
 Denial of services

Cipher System

• Symmetric Key Encryption: same keys are used for encrypting and decrypting (secret

key cryptosystem). Primarily used for privacy and confidentiality
• Asymmetric Key Encryption: where different keys are used for encrypting and

decrypting the information. Primarily used for authentication, non-repudiation.

Symmetric Key Cryptography
Features:
• Both parties must share a common key prior to exchange of

information,
• Keys are recommended to be changed regularly to prevent any attack

on the system.
• A robust mechanism needs to exist to exchange the key between the

communicating parties. As keys are required to be changed
regularly, this mechanism becomes expensive and cumbersome

Symmetric Key Cryptography
• In a group of n people, to enable two-party communication between any two

persons, the number of keys required for group is n × (n – 1)/2.
• Length of Key (number of bits) is smaller ➔ process of encryption-decryption is

faster than asymmetric key encryption.
• Processing power of computer system required to run symmetric algorithm is

less.

Challenges
• Key establishment − Before any communication, both the sender and the

receiver need to agree on a secret symmetric key. It requires a secure key
establishment mechanism in place.
• Trust Issue − Since the sender and the receiver use the same symmetric key,

there is an implicit requirement that the sender and the receiver ‘trust’ each
other.

Traditional Ciphers
• Based on symmetric key encryption scheme.

Each letter/group
of letters of
plaintext are
replaced by some
others, to obtain
the ciphertext

Letters of
plaintext are
permuted in some
form.

Transposition Ciphers

Substitution Ciphers

• The only security service these systems provide is confidentiality.

Substitution Cipher
• All cryptographic algorithms involve substituting one thing for another.
• Caesar cipher: Taking each letter in the plaintext message and substituting

the letter that is k letters later.
• For k = 3, the text “bob, i love you. alice” becomes “ere, l oryh brx. dolfh” in

ciphertext.
• There are only 25 possible key values to break the code if one know that the

Caesar cipher was being used.

English letters frequency

Try to break this cipher
Ciphertext: efgfoe uif fbtu xbmm pg uif dbtumf
Plaintext: ?

Substitution Cipher
• Monoalphabetic

• Polyalphabetic

• These two Caesar ciphers, C1 and C2, can be used in the repeating pattern

C1, C2, C2, C1, C2.

Transposition cipher

Asymmetric Key Encryption
• Invented in the

20th century to
overcome the necessity
of pre-shared secret
key between
communicating

parties.

Asymmetric Key Encryption
• Every user needs to have a pair of dissimilar but mathematically related

keys, private key and public key.
• One key is used for encryption, the other is for decryption.
• It requires to put the public key in public repository and the private key as a well-

guarded secret → Public Key Encryption.

Asymmetric Key Encryption
• Though public and private keys are related, it is computationally not feasible to

find one from another. This is a strength of this scheme.
• When Alice needs to send data to Bob, he obtains the public key of Bob from

repository, encrypts the data, and transmits.
• Bob uses his private key to extract the plaintext.
• Length of Keys (number of bits) in this encryption is large →the process of

encryption-decryption is slower than symmetric key encryption.

Challenges
• Public-key cryptosystems have one significant challenge − the user needs

to trust that the public key that he is using in communications with a
person really is the public key of that person and has not been spoofed by
a malicious third party.
• This is usually accomplished through a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)

consisting a trusted third party.

Common System Attack
1.

Back door

7.

Session Hijacking

2.

Brute force

8.

Spoofing

3.

Buffer Overflow

9.

Social Engineering

4.

Dos Attack (smurfing, Ping
flood, SYN flood, TearDrop)

10.

System bugs

11.

Malicious software (Viruses,
Trojan horses, worms, Other
malwares, rootkits, keyloggers)

5.

DDoS

6.

Man-in-the-middle

Physical Protection
• Causes of physical damage include fire, floods, earthquakes, power

surges, and vandalism.
• Rooms containing computer equipment should always be locked, only

allowed authorized person.
• Cabling, and the devices that cables plug into, should not be left

exposed

Physical Protection
• To prevent electrical damage to computing equipment, high-quality

surge protectors should be used.
• Surveillance may also be considered a form of physical protection -

The placement of video cameras in key locations
• Intrusion Detection monitors data flow and system requests into

and out of the systems. This is a growing field of study in network
security
• A honeypot is a trap that is set by network personnel in order to

detect unauthorized use of a network resource.

Controlling Access
• Controlling access to a computer network involves deciding and then

limiting who can use the system and when the system can be used.
• Controlling Access Measures

 Password & ID System
 Access Rights
 Auditing

Password & ID
• Typically, this password or ID is either a string of characters

or
a physical feature of a user, such as a fingerprint.
• Rules:

 Change password often,
 Use complex passwords
 Do not share password with others

Password
policy

Access rights
• Windows: NTFS Permissions, shared permission
• Linux:

-rwxr-xr-x

Auditing
• Auditing a computer system is a good way to deter crime
• Be useful in apprehending a criminal after a crime has been committed

• Computer auditing usually involves having a software program that

monitors every transaction within a system. As each transaction occurs,
it is recorded into an electronic log along with the date, time, and
“owner” of the transaction.
• Windows Event viewer
• Windows Security Auditing

Securing data
Properties of secure communication
1.

Confidentiality: Only sender & receiver understand the contents of the transmitted
message →Need to be encrypted.

2.

Integrity: The content of communication is not altered (maliciously or accidentaly) in
transit.

3.

End-Point authentication: Both the sender and receiver should be able to confirm
the identity of the other party.

4.

Operational security: Firewall & IDS

Internet Security
Protocols
1.

Network Layer Protocols

2.

Transport Layer Protocols

3.

Application Layer Protocols

Network Layer
Security

IP Security (IPSec)
• IPSec is a collection of protocols designed by the Internet

Engineering Task Force (IETF) to provide security for a packet at
the network level. IPSec helps create authenticated and conﬁdential

packets for the IP layer

IPSec Two Modes
• Transport mode: protects what is

• Tunnel mode: protects the entire

delivered from the transport layer

IP packet, including the header.

to the network layer. It does not

protect the IP header.

Transport mode
• Transport mode is normally used when we need host-to-host (end-to-

end) protection of data.
• The sending host uses IPSec to authenticate and/or encrypt the

payload delivered from the transport layer. The receiving host uses
IPSec to check the authentication and/or decrypt the IP packet and
deliver it to the transport layer.

Tunnel mode
•

Tunnel mode is normally used between two routers, between a host
and a router, or between a router and a host. The entire original
packet is protected from intrusion between the sender and the
receiver, as if the whole packet goes through an imaginary tunnel

Two security protocols
IPSec deﬁnes two protocols:

Security Association
• Logical relationship between 2 hosts:

 If confidentiality is concerned: the key used and the encryption /decryption
algorithm
 If Confidentiality, Authentication, Integrity is concerned:
protocols used such as IPSec AH or IPSec ESP
• SA is the one-way relationship between a sender and a receiver, defined

by IPSec parameters: One SA for inbound traffic, and one for outbound.
• SADB – Security Association Database
• SPI – Security Policy Index:

 A unique index for each entry in the SADB
 Identifies the SA associated with a packet

Internet Key Exchange
• A protocol designed to create both inbound and outbound Security

Associations.
• When a peer needs to send an IP packet, it consults the Security

Policy Database (SPD) to see if there is an SA for that type of trafﬁc.
If there is no SA, IKE is called to establish one.
• IKE creates SA for IPSec
• ISAKMP is a protocol designed by the National Security Agency

(NSA) that actually implements the exchanges deﬁned in IKE

Virtual Private Network
• VPN Technology uses protocol ESP of IPSec in tunnel mode

Transport Layer
Security

SSL Key principle and Techniques
Authentication: SSL/TLS authenticates the server using digital certificates.
The client verifies the server's identity by:
• Checking the certificate's validity (expiry date, revocation status).
• Verifying the certificate's chain of trust (ensuring it's issued by a trusted

CA).
• Checking the certificate's domain name against the domain name of the

website. This prevents "man-in-the-middle" attacks where a malicious actor
impersonates the server.
Encryption: SSL/TLS uses strong encryption algorithms (AES)

SSL Key principle and Techniques
• Integrity: The MAC (Message Authentication Code) Any modification to the

data will result in an incorrect MAC, and the receiver will detect the
tampering.
• Confidentiality (using the Shared Secret): Encryption of the data using

a shared secret key, derived during the handshake.
• Key Exchange Mechanisms : The keys for each session are unique and

based on temporary parameters exchanged during the handshake. This is a
critical security enhancement.
• Strong Cryptographic Algorithms: robust cryptographic algorithms (e.g.,

AES-256 for encryption, SHA-256 for hashing)

Weakness and Attacks
• Certificate Issues: Problems with certificates (e.g., expired

certificates, compromised private keys) can compromise the security
of the connection.
• Downgrade Attacks: An attacker can try to force the client and

server to use an older, weaker version of SSL/TLS or a less secure

cipher suite.
• Man-in-the-Middle Attacks: While certificate validation aims to

prevent these, attackers can still try to intercept the connection and

impersonate the server.

Application Layer
Security

E-mail Security
• Sending an e-mail is a one-time activity. The nature of this activity is

different from IPSec or SSL, where the two parties create a session
between themselves and exchange data in both directions.
• In e-mail, there is no session. Alice sends a message to Bob;

sometime later, Bob reads the message and may or may not send a
reply.
• The security here is unidirectional because what Alice sends to Bob

is totally independent from what Bob sends to Alice

Cryptographic Algorithms
• The protocol deﬁnes a set of algorithms for each operation that the

user used in his/her system.
• Alice includes the name (or identiﬁers) of the algorithms she has

used in the e-mail. For example, Alice can choose DES for
encryption/ decryption and MD5 for hashing. When Alice sends a
message to Bob, she includes the corresponding identiﬁers for DES
and MD5 in her message. Bob receives the message and extracts the
identiﬁers ﬁrst. He then knows which algorithm to use for decryption
and which one for hashing

Cryptographic Secrets
• In e-mail security, the encryption/decryption is done using a

symmetric-key algorithm, but the secret key to decrypt the message
is encrypted with the public key of the receiver and is sent with the

message
• PGP (Pretty Good Privacy) is the security protocol provided email

with privacy, integrity and authentication.

